Six Degrees of Wikipedia
Group members: Kieran, Andreaa, Jayme

Our project is a Java application that finds the shortest hyperlink path
between any two Wikipedia articles, a programmatic version of the "Six
Degrees of Wikipedia" problem. We built it on the Stanford SNAP
wiki-topcats dataset, a 2011 snapshot of the Wikipedia hyperlink graph
containing roughly 1.79 million articles and 28.5 million directed
links between them. The core algorithm is breadth-first search from the
source article with parent pointers stored along the way, which lets us
reconstruct the actual chain of links once we reach the target. On top
of the path finder, we added a statistical component that estimates the
average shortest-path length on the graph and identifies the "bridge"
articles, such as United States, England, and World War II, that show
up most often as intermediate nodes in random shortest paths. The
application supports a one-shot CLI query, an interactive REPL that
loads the graph once and answers many queries, and a bulk statistics
runner that produces the analysis numbers for our write-up.

Categories used

This project draws on two of the course categories. The primary one is
Graphs and graph algorithms. We use a directed graph stored in
compressed sparse row form, BFS to compute single-source shortest paths
in a unit-weight graph, parent pointers to reconstruct the actual path,
and a generation-counter trick to reuse BFS state across queries
without zeroing the 1.79 million-entry parent array between runs. The
second category is Information Networks and the World Wide Web. The
Wikipedia hyperlink graph is exactly the kind of small-world network
covered in lecture, and our statistics confirm the lecture story
empirically: the mean shortest-path length is about 3.8 hops despite
the graph having 1.79 million nodes, and the bridge frequency
distribution is heavily skewed toward a handful of mega-hubs.

Work breakdown

Kieran handled the data loading pipeline, including the byte-level
parser that reads the 430 MB edge file in two passes and builds the CSR
representation, plus the title index that supports case-insensitive and
underscore-insensitive article name lookup. Andreaa wrote the BFS
and path reconstruction logic in PathFinder.java, including the
generation-counter optimization that makes repeated queries fast. We
collaborated on the statistics module (mean path length with confidence
intervals, bridge counting, Wilson intervals on the bridge proportions,
and the split-half stability check using Spearman's rank correlation),
on the CLI surface in Main.java, and on debugging the loader against
smaller subgraphs before running on the full dataset. Jayme prepared
the demo data and browser demo, checked the command-line workflow, and
helped write the final README and user manual. All three members
contributed to testing and to the final project write-up.

AI usage

We used Claude at a few specific points in the project.
Early on, we used it to brainstorm scope, in particular whether to
build the path finder on the full English Wikipedia dump or on the
smaller SNAP wiki-topcats dataset; Claude helped us reason through the
memory tradeoffs and we ended up choosing SNAP because it fits
comfortably in a 2 GB heap on a laptop. We also used Claude as a sanity
check on the sampling methodology for the statistics section,
specifically to confirm the form of the Riondato and Kornaropoulos
sample-size bound for betweenness estimation and to talk through why
Wilson intervals are more appropriate than the textbook normal
interval when the bridge-frequency proportions are small. All of the
Java code, the empirical analysis, and the writing in this readme are
our own work. Claude was used as a thinking partner during planning,
not as a code generator.

Changes from proposal:

The original proposal focused on a single shortest-path finder. The
final project keeps that core feature and adds three concrete extensions:
an interactive REPL so the graph only has to be loaded once, a statistics
runner for average path length and bridge-article analysis, and a small
browser demo that illustrates the same BFS idea on a 16-article toy graph.

How to run

Build the Java classes first if target/classes is missing:

  mkdir -p target/classes
  javac --release 17 -d target/classes src/main/java/wikipath/*.java

With the included demo data, run:

  java -cp target/classes wikipath.Main path --edges demo-data/edges.txt --names demo-data/names.txt "Kanye West" "Quantum mechanics"

For repeated queries, run:

  java -cp target/classes wikipath.Main repl --edges demo-data/edges.txt --names demo-data/names.txt

For the full SNAP dataset, first run:

  bash scripts/download-data.sh

Then use the default data paths:

  java -Xmx2g -cp target/classes wikipath.Main path "Kanye West" "Quantum mechanics"
  java -Xmx2g -cp target/classes wikipath.Main stats --preset quick

Dataset source

The full data comes from the Stanford SNAP wiki-topcats dataset:
https://snap.stanford.edu/data/wiki-topcats.html. The download script
fetches wiki-topcats.txt.gz and wiki-topcats-page-names.txt.gz and
places the uncompressed files in data/. The repository also includes
demo-data/edges.txt and demo-data/names.txt so the program can be run
quickly without downloading the 430 MB full edge file.
